=How to use GET parameters (parameters in the URL)?

All pages are services ([[wiki(72):howto/page|How does a page's source code look?]]). These services has two parameters: **path** and **get_params**.

* The first parameter, **path**, is used to set choose the path URL.
* The second parameter, **get_params**, is the one that interests you!

=== path

This argument is a **list of string**, corresponding to the URL where your page service can be found.

For example, if you want your page to be accessed via this URL:
<<code language='ocaml'|http://website.com/a/b/c>>
You must provide this path:
<<code language='ocaml'|    ~path:["a";"b";"c"]>>

This parameter can also be an **empty list**. It means that the service page will be accessed via this URL:
<<code|http://website.com/>>

=== get_params

Services can have several parameters of several types.

Don't forget to open the module [[wiki(72):eliom/api/server/Eliom_parameter|Eliom_parameter]] at the beginning of your file!

==== Syntax for several parameters

* **No parameter**
<<code language='ocaml'|~get_params:unit>>

* **One parameter**
<<code language='ocaml'|~get_params:(int "id")>>

* **More parameters**
<<code language='ocaml'|~get_params:(string "name" ** int "age" ** bool "graduate")>>

==== Types of parameters

* **Common types**: [[https://github.com/db0company/Ocsigen-Quick-Howto/blob/master/parameters/example.eliom#L121|string]], [[https://github.com/db0company/Ocsigen-Quick-Howto/blob/master/parameters/example.eliom#L122|int]], [[https://github.com/db0company/Ocsigen-Quick-Howto/blob/master/parameters/example.eliom#L123|int32]], [[https://github.com/db0company/Ocsigen-Quick-Howto/blob/master/parameters/example.eliom#L124|float]], [[https://github.com/db0company/Ocsigen-Quick-Howto/blob/master/parameters/example.eliom#L125|bool]]
* **Some other types**: [[https://github.com/db0company/Ocsigen-Quick-Howto/blob/master/parameters/example.eliom#L126|optional values]], [[https://github.com/db0company/Ocsigen-Quick-Howto/blob/master/parameters/example.eliom#L158|any parameter]], [[https://github.com/db0company/Ocsigen-Quick-Howto/blob/master/parameters/example.eliom#L187|list]], [[https://github.com/db0company/Ocsigen-Quick-Howto/blob/master/parameters/example.eliom#L211|your own type]].

* See the whole list of available parameters in [[wiki(72):eliom/api/server/Eliom_parameter|Eliom documentation]]

==== Get these parameters

On service registration, parameters can be retrieved as a parameter of the function:
<<code language='ocaml'|
Example.register ~service:the_service
    (fun parameters () -> ...)
>>

* **No parameter**
<<code language='ocaml'|    (fun () () -> ...)>>

* **One parameter**
<<code language='ocaml'|    (fun a () -> ...)>>

* **Several parameters**

The operator is left associative:
<<code language='ocaml'|    (fun (a, (b, (c, d)))) () -> ...)>>

=== Variable paths

Parameters provided in the path are constant. It's possible to have a variable URL!

Imagine you want to offer a personal page to your users. You will need a variable URL that will look like this, where //xxx// can be replace by the username:
<<code|http://website.com/users/xxx>>

To do that, add a parameter of type **suffix** in **get_params**:
<<code|~get_params:(suffix (string "username"))>>


=== Download full code

* [[https://github.com/db0company/Ocsigen-Quick-Howto/blob/master/parameters/example.eliom|Read the full code]]
* [[https://github.com/db0company/Ocsigen-Quick-Howto|Download and try this example (parameters)]]

=== Links

* [[wiki(72):eliom/api/server/Eliom_parameter|Eliom_parameter]]
* [[wiki(72):eliom/api/server/Eliom_service|Eliom_service]]
